Update guide for Camunda exporter (#5023)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/operational-guides/update-guide/870-to-880.md

The importer reads data from existing Zeebe Elasticsearch indices, and when it detects data from newer versions, it marks itself as complete. The Camunda Exporter then starts exporting only when the importer is done.

:::important
To reduce the potential of building a backlog, the user needs to make sure to drain the backlog queue as much as possible before the update.

**Otherwise**, the backlog might increase, causing to not show up-to-date data in the web-applications. Furthermore, Zeebe
will be not able to clean up data, causing to run Out-of-Disk space in worst case. This will produce down-time.
:::

The backlog can be validated via the following Prometheus metrics:

- `operate_import_time_seconds_sum`
- `operate_import_time_seconds_count`

For example, the following query shows the import latency. If the result is in a range of seconds (ideally below 10 seconds), it is fine to update.

```promql
sum(rate(operate_import_time_seconds_sum{namespace=~"$namespace", partition=~"$partition", pod=~"$pod"}[$__rate_interval]))
/ sum(rate(operate_import_time_seconds_count{namespace=~"$namespace", partition=~"$partition", pod=~"$pod"}[$__rate_interval]))
```

> ### Data migration

Author: @panagiotisgts I described a bit more the Migration application and the configs, could you please check this for correctness.

## Camunda Exporter

The new Camunda Exporter brings the importing and archiving logic of web components (Tasklist and Operate) closer to the distributed platform (Zeebe). This simplifies the installation, enables scalability for the web applications, reduces latency when showing runtime and historical data, and reduces data duplication (resource consumption).

![87-state](./img/87-state-refined.png)

Camunda web applications use importers and archivers to consume, aggregate, and archive historical data provided by the Elasticsearch (ES) or OpenSearch (OS) exporters. The new Camunda Exporter introduces changes in the architecture users should be aware of.

During the migration/update phase, the Operate and Tasklist importer and the Elasticsearch exporter are still required. This allows 8.7 data written to the Zeebe journal, or already in the Zeebe Elasticsearch indices, to be imported into the new harmonized index schema.

![brownfield](./img/target-brown-field-refined.png)

### Harmonized Indices

The harmonized schema looks like the following:

![harmonized-schema](./img/harmonized-indices-miro-v2.png)

> This reduces the need for several indices and to make use of existing ones (Operate indices are used by Tasklist, etc.)

Reviewer: Since the content is largely the same, I think it would be appropriate to just link directly to the announcement here, and that way this guide can only include the upgrade notes. This would allow you to increase the headers on the later content and make it a bit easier to browse.

### Notes for updating to 8.8

When updating from Camunda 8.7 to 8.8, the following should be considered regarding the Camunda Exporter and harmonized indices.

#### Ensure the exporter/import backlog is small

> For data from 8.7 to be imported, the importers must run first and complete before the Camunda Exporter can start.
> 
> The importer reads data from existing Zeebe Elasticsearch indices, and when it detects data from newer versions, it marks itself as complete. The Camunda Exporter then starts exporting only when the importer is done.
> 
> :::important
> To reduce the potential of building a backlog,
> the user needs to make sure to drain the backlog queue as much as possible before the update.
> :::

Reviewer: Not necessary here, but since the header for this section is on backlog size, it would be nice to know what would happen if the backlog is too large and you attempt to upgrade anyway. 

```suggestion
For data from 8.7 to be imported, the importers must first run and complete before the Camunda Exporter can start. The importer reads data from existing Zeebe Elasticsearch indices, and when it detects data from newer versions, it marks itself as complete. The Camunda Exporter then starts exporting only when the importer is done.

If the import backlog is too large, [why do we require the backlog to be small].

:::important
To reduce the potential of building a backlog, drain the backlog queue as much as possible before the update.
:::
```

The backlog can be validated via the following Prometheus metrics:

- `operate_import_time_seconds_sum`
- `operate_import_time_seconds_count`

> For example, the following query shows the import latency. If the result is in a range of seconds, it is fine to update.

Reviewer: Can we be more specific with a recommendation here? Is "a range of seconds" anything under a minute? 

```suggestion
For example, the following query shows the import latency. We recommend updating only if the result is within [recommended range of seconds].
```

```promql
sum(rate(operate_import_time_seconds_sum{namespace=~"$namespace", partition=~"$partition", pod=~"$pod"}[$__rate_interval]))
/ sum(rate(operate_import_time_seconds_count{namespace=~"$namespace", partition=~"$partition", pod=~"$pod"}[$__rate_interval]))
```

#### Data migration

> To enable Tasklist to utilize the new harmonized indices, Camunda 8.8 provides a migration application to enhance existing process models. This migration application runs asynchronously to the other applications until the importers are done, and ensures that all processes created in 8.7 are migrated and enhanced.

Reviewer: I reworded this a little bit but want to make sure the content is still correct - just calling it out for review!

Author: Looks good thanks

> The migration application can be found in the `camunda/bin/migrate` directory.

Reviewer: Is there any other step/information required here? Is there a specific point in the update process where this should be run (judging by the positioning, is it after the importers are done, but before you run the prefix migration?). It might be nice to call that out if so:
```suggestion
The migration application can be found in the `camunda/bin/migrate` directory. Ensure the application is run prior to updating any [custom prefixes](#update-any-custom-prefixes).
```

If there is no recommendation, we should state that.

Author: The suggestion is not correct. The index prefix migration is only necessary if they customer used a custom prefix before and then IT MUST run as a first step. I just have this moved more to the back, as it is not always needed.

:::note
When using the Camunda 8 Helm charts, the migration application will automatically deploy with the importers.
:::

#### Turn off importers after completion

Importers are only necessary at the start of the migration. Once complete, they can be safely turned off.

To detect whether importers are done, users can validate the state in the Elasticsearch/OpenSearch index:

- `tasklist-import-position-8.2.0_`
- `operate-import-position-8.3.0_`

If all entries show the `completed` property set to `true`, the importing is done.

Alternatively, metrics can be validated via:

- `operate_import_completed`
- `tasklist_import_completed`

These properties can be used in the following example query:

```
sum(tasklist_import_completed{namespace="$namespace"}) by (importPositionAlias)
```

![metrics-import-complete](./img/import-complete-metrics.png)

#### Update any custom prefixes

:::important
This step is required if you use an installation with custom prefixes.
:::

> The new harmonized index schema introduces one common index prefix. To update to Camunda 8.8, indices must first migrate to one common index, so the Camunda Exporter, REST API, and other consumers can be configured correctly.

Reviewer: I couldn't quite tell in this second sentence if "indices must first migrate to one common index" meant "existing indices using custom prefixes must be migrated to a common prefix" - is something along those lines more descriptive? It would be nice to be clear.

Author: Makes sense, or sounds right.

##### Prefix migration

:::warning
Disk usage will massively increase while the migration is ongoing (and will return to normal when complete).
Ensure you have at least double the disk space free.
:::

:::note
While we test and validate the provided migration script,
it is recommended that you first back up the database, and test the migration script in a test environment first
to ensure there are no unexpected issues.

> :::

Reviewer: Would it be a good practice to always test the script before running it, even after the migration is out of our own test/validate phrase? We could remove the first portion of the sentence if so.

Author: Not fully sure, whether I understand what you mean. But I guess we can improve this note yes.

Author: Improved https://github.com/camunda/camunda-docs/pull/5023/commits/52bf2add93d31034f16c11d2727d80be8dc108ed

:::note
The prefix migration involves downtime, as all data in the secondary storage needs to be migrated to a different prefix, and writes need to be stopped in between.
:::

Complete the following steps to migrate any custom prefixes:

> 1. Shut down your Camunda 8.7 cluster (for example, reduce the replicas to zero). No traffic can be executed against your to-be-migrated ES/OS prefixes.
> 2. In the `camunda/bin` directory there is a `prefix-migration` script that will execute the prefix migration, which can be executed locally.
>    Pass the desired prefix using the `CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX` environment variable.
> 
>    1. Make sure that your configuration in `camunda/config` has set the previous custom prefixes. Such that the prefix migration script can find them.
>    2. Alternatively, you can set them via env vars.

Reviewer: I had a hard time following the order of these steps - could you clarify if the following is true?
```suggestion
1. Shut down your Camunda 8.7 cluster (for example, reduce the replicas to zero). No traffic can be executed against your to-be-migrated ES/OS prefixes.
2. Set the `CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX` environment variable to your desired prefix.
3. Ensure that your configuration in `camunda/config` contains the previous custom prefixes, such that the prefix migration script can find them.
  - Alternatively, you can set them via environment variables:
4. In the `camunda/bin` directory, execute the `prefix-migration` script, which can be run locally.
```

"such that the prefix migration script can find them" wasn't clear to me, as it implies the script needs them formatted in a unique way. If the user has set custom prefixes, will these already be set? Are we having them verify? Otherwise, this reads like they might have to change something, and we should be specific if so.

Author: >"such that the prefix migration script can find them" wasn't clear to me, as it implies the script needs them formatted in a unique way. If the user has set custom prefixes, will these already be set? Are we having them verify? Otherwise, this reads like they might have to change something, and we should be specific if so.

Agreed. it is a bit colloquial. IF the user has a custom prefix then it MUST be configured before in their configs, in their application.yaml. We need to have access to these values from the prefix migration application. We could be more specific and simply do: `SPRING_CONFIG_ADDITIONALLOCATION=/path/to/application.yaml ./camunda/bin/prefix-migration

   ```shell
   export CAMUNDA_OPERATE_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX=old-operate-prefix; \
   export CAMUNDA_TASKLIST_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX=old-tasklist-prefix; \
   export CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX=some-new-prefix; \
   ./prefix-migration
   ```

With the migration finished, the following configuration changes must be made prior to updating to 8.8.

:::note
Without these configuration changes, the update to 8.8 will fail.
:::

> Given a new desired prefix of `some-new-prefix`:
> 
> - The configured `CAMUNDA_OPERATE_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX` must now be `some-new-prefix`.
> - The configured `CAMUNDA_TASKLIST_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX` must now be `some-new-prefix`.
> - The prefix for the [Camunda exporter](/self-managed/zeebe-deployment/exporters/camunda-exporter.md) should be configured using `ZEEBE_BROKER_EXPORTERS_CAMUNDA_ARGS_INDEX_PREFIX` to `some-new-prefix`.

Reviewer: This section says configuration changes must be made, but these don't feel like instructions. If the user _must_ set this config following the completion of the script, I'd recommend the following: 
```suggestion
Given a new desired prefix of `some-new-prefix`:

- Set `CAMUNDA_OPERATE_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX` to `some-new-prefix`.
- Set `CAMUNDA_TASKLIST_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX` to `some-new-prefix`.
- Set `ZEEBE_BROKER_EXPORTERS_CAMUNDA_ARGS_INDEX_PREFIX` (the prefix for the new [Camunda exporter](/self-managed/zeebe-deployment/exporters/camunda-exporter.md) to `some-new-prefix`.
```

The following sections explain which adjustments must be made to migrate from Camunda 8.7.x to 8.8.x for each component.

## Camunda Exporter

In the past release, we’ve engineered a new Camunda Exporter, which brings the importer and archiving logic of web components (Tasklist and Operate) closer to our distributed platform (Zeebe).
This allows us to simplify our installation, enable scalability for web apps, reduce the latency to show runtime and historical data, and reduce data duplication (resource consumption).

![87-state](./img/87-state-refined.png)

Our web applications have historically used importers and archivers to consume, aggregate, and archive historical data provided by our Elasticsearch (ES) or OpenSearch (OS) Exporter.

> With the introduction of the Camunda Exporter, there are some changes in the architecture users should be aware of.

Reviewer 2: same comment here (and elsewhere) as in the 8.8 announcements above

![brownfield](./img/target-brown-field-refined.png)

We have introduced the Camunda Exporter to simplify things and get several benefits from it.

For the migration/update phase, we still need to run the Operate and Tasklist importer and the Elasticsearch Exporter. This is to make sure that old
data written in 8.7 to the Zeebe journal or already in the Zeebe Elasticsearch indices, gets imported into our new
harmonized index schema.

### Harmonized Indices

The harmonized schema looks like the following:

> ![harmoninzed-schema](./img/harmonized-indices-miro-v2.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![harmonized-schema](./img/harmonized-indices-miro-v2.png)
```
Small typo

> We were able to reduce the need for several indices and to make use of existing ones (Operate indices are used by Tasklist, etc.)

Reviewer 2: Again, a more user-friendly description of what is meant by the harmonized indices would be nice

> ### Notes for updating to 8.7

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Notes for updating to 8.8
```

> Notes for updating to 8.7 related to the Camunda Exporter and harmonized indices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notes for updating to 8.8 related to the Camunda Exporter and harmonized indices.
```

#### Users need to make sure that the exporter/import backlog is small

As we mentioned above we need to import old data from 8.7 via the importers.
The importers need to run first and complete before the Camunda Exporter can confidently start.

> The Importer is reading data, from existing Zeebe Elasticsearch indices, and as soon it detects data from newer versions, like 8.8

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Importer is reading data, from existing Zeebe Elasticsearch indices, and as soon it detects data from newer versions,
```

it marks itself as complete. The Camunda Exporter can detect this and will start exporting only if the Importer is done.

:::important

> To reduce the here potential of building a backlog, which can cause, on the Zeebe side, issues

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To reduce the potential of building a backlog,
```

the user needs to make sure to drain the backlog queue as much as possible before the update.
:::

> The backlog can be validated via the following metrics:

Reviewer 4: I suggest to make it explicit:

`following metrics` => `following Prometheus metrics`

> (like growing disk, as records don't get exported and cleaned up, etc.), the user need to make sure to drain the backlog queue before the update.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 the user needs to make sure to drain the backlog queue as much as possible before the update.
```

- operate_import_time_seconds_sum
- operate_import_time_seconds_count

For example, the following query will show the import latency, if this is low in a range of seconds it is fine to update.

```promql
sum(rate(operate_import_time_seconds_sum{namespace=~"$namespace", partition=~"$partition", pod=~"$pod"}[$__rate_interval]))
/ sum(rate(operate_import_time_seconds_count{namespace=~"$namespace", partition=~"$partition", pod=~"$pod"}[$__rate_interval]))
```

#### Data migration

As we have harmonized indices there are some details Tasklist needs as part of the processes, which were not part of
existing Operate process indices.

For this reason, we have built a migration application to enhance existing process models. This migration application will

> run asynchronous next to the other applications, until the importers are done.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
run asynchronously next to the other applications, until the importers are done.
```

> For such we have built a migration application to enhance existing process models. This migration application will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this reason, we have built a migration application to enhance existing process models. This migration application will
```

> run asynchronous next to the other applications, and until the importers are done.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
run asynchronous next to the other applications, until the importers are done.
```

As Importers are only necessary at the beginning, due to importing old data / draining the queue of 8.7 events,
they can be turned off later.

To detect whether importers are done, users can either validate the state in the Elasticsearch/OpenSearch Index:

- `tasklist-import-position-8.2.0_`
- `operate-import-position-8.3.0_`

If for all entries the `completed` property is set to true, the importing is done.

Alternatively, metrics can be validated via:

- `operate_import_completed`
- `tasklist_import_completed`

Example query could be: `sum(tasklist_import_completed{namespace="$namespace"}) by (importPositionAlias)`

![metrics-import-complete](./img/import-complete-metrics.png)

#### Custom prefix usage needs extra care

:::important
This is a requirement if you use an installation with custom prefixes.
:::

As we have harmonized our index schema as part of the Camunda Exporter development, we have introduced one common index prefix.
To update indices need to migrate to one common index, so the Camunda Exporter and also REST API and other consumers
can be configured correctly.

##### Prefix migration

:::warning
Disk usage will massively increase while the migration is ongoing.

> Make sure you have at least double of disk space free.

Reviewer 3: Can we add that it will return to "normal" state after migration?

:::

:::note

> While we test and validate the provided migration script.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While we test and validate the provided migration script,
```

> it is recommended that you first back up the Elasticsearch, and test the migration script in a test environment first

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it is recommended that you first back up the Database, and test the migration script in a test environment first
```

> It is recommended that you first back up the Elasticsearch, and test the migration script in a test environment first

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it is recommended that you first back up the Elasticsearch, and test the migration script in a test environment first
```

to ensure there are no unexpected issues.
:::

:::note

> The prefix migration involves downtime.

Reviewer 3: Can we add some explanation of what it means for users and that processing is not affected?

:::

Steps for prefix migration:

1. Shut down your Camunda 8.7 cluster, fex. reduce the replicas to zero. Such that no traffic will executed against your to-be-migrated ES/OS prefixes.

> 2. In the `camunda/bin` directory there is a `prefix-migration` script that will execute the prefix migration,

Reviewer 4: Where is that instance running if the cluster is already shut down?

Author: Do you mean the `prefix-migration` application? Can be everywhere, locally or deployed. But in this example locally I would suspect.

Reviewer 4: In that case, let's mention it explicitly to avoid any confusion from the reader.

Author: I did in my last commit. :)

Author: https://github.com/camunda/camunda-docs/pull/5023/commits/3040ddde6e48b683486300cced3aaea6366ba156

   pass the desired prefix using the `CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX` environment variable.
   1. Make sure that your configuration in `camunda/config` has set the previous custom prefixes. Such that the prefix migration script can find them.
   2. Alternatively, you can set them via env vars.

```shell
export CAMUNDA_OPERATE_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX=old-operate-prefix; \
export CAMUNDA_TASKLIST_ELASTICSEARCH_INDEX_PREFIX=old-tasklist-prefix; \
export CAMUNDA_DATABASE_INDEXPREFIX=some-new-prefix; \
./prefix-migration
```

With the migration finished, There are mandatory configuration changes to be made prior to updating to 8.8.

:::note
Without these configuration changes the update to 8.8 will fail.
:::

> Given a new desired prefix of `some-prefix`

Reviewer 5: shouldn't this say `some-new-prefix`
